Oh.
NOTE CONF
It's okay.
I've got my red light here.
NOTE CONF
So that's the prompt to start.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Straight in.
NOTE CONF
Um, as I said yesterday, uh, what we're doing today
is pretty much follows on from what we've done yesterday.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we've talked about subspace and spanning.
We now go through the concepts of linear independence and
NOTE CONF
then onto what?
What we actually mean by a dimension.
NOTE CONF
Uh, since it's so tightly interlinked with what I've done
yesterday, I have a couple of slides, just a few
NOTE CONF
minutes of just reminding you where we were yesterday.
Uh, so we talked about a subspace, and we have
NOTE CONF
the definition here.
It's basically means it's a sort of subset of whatever
NOTE CONF
we're working in R, n or so, which is closed
with respect to vector addition and scalar multiplication.
NOTE CONF
So in other words, if we take the vectors and
sort of take any linear combination of those vectors that
NOTE CONF
won't take us outside of the subspace.
That's the definition of a subspace.
NOTE CONF
And we talked a bit about um, so linear combinations
obviously an important concept here.
NOTE CONF
We talked about the sort of what's the smallest subspace
that encompasses some vectors.
NOTE CONF
And we see that sort of that is the span.
So if you've got a couple of vectors then the
NOTE CONF
span is the set of all linear combination.
And that's sort of the smallest subset that includes all
NOTE CONF
of these vectors.
So they span S a subspace sorry subspace should be
NOTE CONF
careful that the span is a subspace.
And indeed it's the smallest subspace that is containing those
NOTE CONF
vectors.
Um, so to some extent you can think of these
NOTE CONF
spanning set the Z as a sort of generating set
of the subspace.
NOTE CONF
Now, we wanted to know a little bit more about
the relation between these sort of generating sets and the
NOTE CONF
subspace that we span and then we've got to I
think this was just about the last poll here, um,
NOTE CONF
that we have.
Well, um, could we have something where we've got three
NOTE CONF
vectors and we're looking at the set span or the
subspace spanned by the first two.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then also the, the subset spanned by the
last two, uh, but by all of them, we see
NOTE CONF
that these are actually the same one.
Um, as long as the vector that we're adding to
NOTE CONF
the generating set is a linear combination of the others.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And um, so to some extent there's a bit of
a, um, of a sort of unsatisfactory situation.
NOTE CONF
And let me just go and sort of show you
what we've got.
NOTE CONF
So we've got this situation here that we say, say
we've been R2 here, um, and we've got a where
NOTE CONF
are we?
So that's R2, though, we've got a few vectors.
NOTE CONF
So we'll have sort of or something there, and varying
length, varying directions.
NOTE CONF
So we might have this, we might have something like
that that.
NOTE CONF
So loads of vectors here.
And indeed it turns out we can sort of take
NOTE CONF
any two of them as the, as the spanning set
here.
NOTE CONF
Any using any of two of them will span of
R2 unless he's sort of unlucky.
NOTE CONF
And I think I've got two here that are opposite
directions.
NOTE CONF
If they're sort of the same direction opposite, they won't
span the whole thing.
NOTE CONF
But otherwise any three of them will span and the
rest is redundant.
NOTE CONF
So can we.
Can we say something a bit more?
NOTE CONF
How do I identify redundant vectors is just enough to
just take some of them out.
NOTE CONF
How many do we need to take out in order
to have something that isn't redundant anymore?
NOTE CONF
So that's sort of the setup where we are starting
in today.
NOTE CONF
So as I said, we've got this thing here that
we said, um, so the span, if I've got two
NOTE CONF
vectors that are spanning something, and I'm adding a third
vector, which is a linear combination of the ones that
NOTE CONF
are already have.
They're not adding anything to that.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So what I wanted to start with is to some
NOTE CONF
extent turning doing it the other way round.
So now I've got the following that I've got x.
NOTE CONF
Here's the span of some vectors.
And I'm going to take another vector y which is
NOTE CONF
a linear combination of them.
And the question is so if I have y they're
NOTE CONF
now the span of all of these vectors together.
What's the relation of x and y.
NOTE CONF
I'm adding something there.
I'm not adding something there.
NOTE CONF
So that would be the first pole.
I think I need to halve that there.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, give me a second.
I'll just set this up so you've got four choices
NOTE CONF
and it's only.
Only one possible answer.
NOTE CONF
This looks okay.
So the polls should be live.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I'll just just in case.
Uh, I'll give you this the, the QR code there
NOTE CONF
for the first, uh, first half a minute or so.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
All.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So another 10s or so.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so most of you think that you're not adding
anything and sort of it's the same situation as before,
NOTE CONF
although it's not quite the same.
I talk a little bit about that in a second.
NOTE CONF
But if you think, why are we adding something to
the spanning set to the, to the sort of spanning
NOTE CONF
set.
So we must add something there.
NOTE CONF
So it's probably worthwhile just having a look at what's
going on there.
NOTE CONF
So let me just go back and um, and I
do some of these things long winded here because I
NOTE CONF
think it's quite important to sort of give you some
examples of how I work with a span and proving
NOTE CONF
things with it.
Um, so what do we have?
NOTE CONF
What's the set up here?
We've got x here is the span of those vectors.
NOTE CONF
Um x one down to x k.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we've got to make this slightly larger.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, we've got y is a vector in this span.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And on the other hand, we have capital Y, which
should be the span of all of these vectors.
NOTE CONF
So x one down to x k.
And then in addition y.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um and I'm claiming that indeed answer A is correct.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So the claim here is the claim here is that
NOTE CONF
x is um equal to y.
We've had that now a few times.
NOTE CONF
How would you approve that?
Two sets are identical.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I will need to show, um, I will need
to show that X is a subset of Y and
NOTE CONF
Y is a subset of x.
Now, I hope that you sort of believe me, um,
NOTE CONF
sort of the spanning set wider is it's larger that
X is probably a subset of Y, so I'm not
NOTE CONF
going to spend anything on that.
But this here is what I am.
NOTE CONF
That that might be contentious here.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, um, we want to show this here.
Um, and how do we do that?
NOTE CONF
Um, well, we take any, any Z, which is in
y, um, and show that this actually is in X
NOTE CONF
as well.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And we want to show that Z is also in
X.
NOTE CONF
So let's go that if you have z in y
what does this mean.
NOTE CONF
Um that is that is in the span.
Um, the span is the space of all linear combinations.
NOTE CONF
So in other words, I can write z as a
linear combination of these vectors.
NOTE CONF
So um, I know there exists um multiples scalars.
I'm going to call these t one down to t
NOTE CONF
k uh for, for those here for the x's.
And I'm just going to have a T here for
NOTE CONF
the y.
Um, and so these are scalars, um, such that I
NOTE CONF
can write Z as a linear combination of all of
them.
NOTE CONF
So I can write z as T1X1 plus and t
k x k plus t times y.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now I want to show that this z is also
NOTE CONF
in x.
So um now this here this is a linear combination
NOTE CONF
of the x's and so on.
That looks all fine.
NOTE CONF
This t times y is the bit that I don't
like for that.
NOTE CONF
Uh so let's see.
Let's see what I can do.
NOTE CONF
Something with a y.
I know that y uh y here is in x.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So that means again, I've got, I've, I can write
NOTE CONF
it as a linear combination.
So I have multiples.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I'm going to call these s now um
s one down to s k um which are such
NOTE CONF
that I can write y as At S1X1 and then
s k x k.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um and you might see where this is going.
NOTE CONF
Um, because I can now take this expression for y
here and substitute that in there.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, so if I do that I can write Z
NOTE CONF
and I'm going to do this sort of in one.
Well, okay.
NOTE CONF
Now let's let's do that Z is so T1X1 plus
plus t k x k plus t times.
NOTE CONF
And then this expression for y here.
Um S1X1 plus s k x k um.
NOTE CONF
And all I have to do there is now just
saw terms.
NOTE CONF
I want to write this as linear combination of the
x's.
NOTE CONF
So I'm just going to have a look and say
well what what do I have for X1.
NOTE CONF
Um I have a T1 from here and I've got
a t times S1 from there.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then finally I've got a t k plus
t times s k times x k.
NOTE CONF
So those things here, uh, these are sort of obviously
scalars.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'm just working with scalars there.
So I've been able to write Z as a linear
NOTE CONF
combination of the x's.
In other words, that indeed, um, z indeed is part
NOTE CONF
of X as well.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So as I say, a little bit long winded, but
to show you how these sort of arguments of that
NOTE CONF
some things in the span of the other works, um,
because they, they tend to come up quite often.
NOTE CONF
Um, now, the way that I phrased it, you might
have thought that, um, so this really is the same
NOTE CONF
as we've done last time.
Um, actually slightly different.
NOTE CONF
So what we've done yesterday is that we say, um,
if I've got it, that I've got sort of, um,
NOTE CONF
a span of two elements and I'm adding another one
to that.
NOTE CONF
And these are identical.
That I must have.
NOTE CONF
This new element is a linear combination of the others.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
On the other hand, what I have done now is
saying if I've got V, which is a linear combination
NOTE CONF
of x and u, then adding v to the spanning
set doesn't change anything.
NOTE CONF
So it's two different directions.
And indeed what we've done here is now have both
NOTE CONF
directions.
In other words these things are equivalent.
NOTE CONF
So if I've got a span of two vectors and
the span of three vectors, these are the same if
NOTE CONF
and only if one of the vectors that I've got
in here must be linear combination of the others.
NOTE CONF
Now this gives us a criterion how to decide whether
a part of our spanning set, or whether some vectors
NOTE CONF
in the spanning set are redundant.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So we can identify use this to identify superfluous vectors
in the spanning set now.
NOTE CONF
So namely the condition is.
So given a set of vectors, we know that none
NOTE CONF
of the vectors here is superfluous in the spanning set.
If none of the vectors are linear combination of the
NOTE CONF
others.
Now okay, this is something that that sounds quite nice
NOTE CONF
and we know what to do, but how do you
actually check that?
NOTE CONF
How do you check that if I give you a
couple of vectors.
NOTE CONF
So in principle, you would have to check all possible
ways that this could do that.
NOTE CONF
This could be.
So you'd have to take X1 as a linear combination.
NOTE CONF
Is x1 a linear combination of the others, or might
x2 be linear combination of the others or and so
NOTE CONF
on.
So it's hard to check every single one of them
NOTE CONF
if you don't quite believe me that that indeed is
the case.
NOTE CONF
I'll just give you an example in two dimensions.
So for example, we might just have x1, x2, x3
NOTE CONF
our three vectors, and I might have something like this
1001 and zero two.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So those three span are two.
NOTE CONF
Um, and indeed, if you look at it, you'll realise
that sort of either the second or the third there
NOTE CONF
are going to be redundant.
But if I now check and say x1, I cannot
NOTE CONF
write as a linear combination of the other two.
So that's checking that doesn't, doesn't isn't enough.
NOTE CONF
I have to go and check whether x2 x3 is
a linear combination.
NOTE CONF
Now in this case it's just two dimensions that are
simple vectors.
NOTE CONF
It's very easy to spot what's going on, but if
you're doing this in sort of higher dimension, it does
NOTE CONF
become that.
In the worst case, you really have to track through
NOTE CONF
all of those conditions.
Now that's that's that's not nice.
NOTE CONF
Um, instead what you can do is there's this definition
here which I claim is Equivalent.
NOTE CONF
So that's the definition of linear independence.
So this holds if we cannot write any vector as
NOTE CONF
a linear combination of the others.
That means these vectors are linearly independent.
NOTE CONF
And I can actually write this condition in this form
here.
NOTE CONF
At first this looks one window that it looks really
strange.
NOTE CONF
Why would you express it in that way?
What's what's the sort of having a linear combination that
NOTE CONF
is equal to zero is only possible if all the
if all the, um, the, um, scalars there are zero.
NOTE CONF
Um, how is that related to the other one?
But actually, indeed, this is a stroke of genius.
NOTE CONF
This is a really nice condition that it's actually easy
to check, and that is equivalent to having to check
NOTE CONF
all the others there.
So I want to convince you, I just want to
NOTE CONF
spend a couple of minutes to convince you that this
actually is equivalent.
NOTE CONF
So if I'm saying none of the vectors can be
written as a linear combination of the others is the
NOTE CONF
equivalent to that.
I'm saying if I have a linear combination of these
NOTE CONF
vectors that is equal to the zero vector, it must
imply that all my multiples, all my scalars there are
NOTE CONF
zero.
And I think this is actually easier to do to
NOTE CONF
prove that the opposites of those statements here are equivalent.
So what are the opposites?
NOTE CONF
Um, so what's the first one?
Says none of the vectors can be written as a
NOTE CONF
linear combination.
So what's the opposite of that?
NOTE CONF
If I say none of the vectors is a linear
combination.
NOTE CONF
So everyone at least one something different.
Um, I'll give you a pole.
NOTE CONF
Um, three options.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Three choices.
Oops wait wait wait wait wait.
NOTE CONF
So why did I thought of a thought of reset
this reset reset display, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this works now.
So another 10s.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So most of you thought it'd be at least one.
NOTE CONF
And that is the case.
Um, but it's worthwhile thinking about these things that if
NOTE CONF
you've got like Qantas like that for all or they
exist or.
NOTE CONF
So what is the negation of the.
Think about an example.
NOTE CONF
Um, you might if you if you're not careful, you
might think that it is indeed a that you say
NOTE CONF
everyone um, it's the, it's the opposite.
But the thing is they're saying with, hey, at least
NOTE CONF
one of them, um, can be written as a linear
combination.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so where does this take us?
Um, so negation of what we have there.
NOTE CONF
Um, so none of the vectors can be written as
linear combination.
NOTE CONF
Negation is at least one of the vectors can be
written as a linear combination, and the second one there
NOTE CONF
is says, well, if you've got a linear combination that
makes the zero vector that requires all of the scalars
NOTE CONF
to be zero, it means we have a combination.
The negation is that we have a combination of of
NOTE CONF
these vectors, where not all of these t's are equal
to zero such that we make the zero vector.
NOTE CONF
Now, um, so I claim that those two, they're equivalent.
Um, and indeed I just want to quickly, actually, I
NOTE CONF
mean, this is a nice example.
And uh, last year I think I had this as
NOTE CONF
the, as the fourth hand in, um, for you to
show that.
NOTE CONF
And I really like it.
And I was quite, um, I wasn't half a mind
NOTE CONF
to give, just give you that again.
But I thought they can't really do that.
NOTE CONF
So I'll give you the quick argument here how that
works, but it's something worth thinking about.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
We have to prove both directions.
NOTE CONF
So first direction is from 1 to 2.
At least one of the vectors can be written as
NOTE CONF
a linear combination of the others.
So, um, I don't want to write too much, but
NOTE CONF
assuming assuming that the one that we can write as
a linear combination, um, is x1.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Uh, so let's say I can write x1 here, um,
NOTE CONF
as a linear combination, so I can write x1 as
saying this is t two times x two plus and
NOTE CONF
so on times t k times xk.
Um whenever I have that, I can now simply bring
NOTE CONF
the x1 here on to the other side.
Um, so I've got zero equals to minus one times
NOTE CONF
x1 plus t2 x2 plus and t k x k
l.
NOTE CONF
So I've now got a linear combination of all of
these vectors that makes zero.
NOTE CONF
And I certainly know that this multiple here there is
not equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So I've got something something like this here.
NOTE CONF
If you think I sort of have something special about
X1, I could obviously do the same thing with everybody
NOTE CONF
else.
It's just to try to save me.
NOTE CONF
Save me writing this.
So the opposite direction.
NOTE CONF
I can do the same thing.
So I'm starting with that.
NOTE CONF
I'm saying assuming that I sort of have a linear
combination t k x k equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I say some t k is some t,
some of them is not equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, so how do I go.
NOTE CONF
Well, assuming and just, just to help me writing this,
assuming it's T1 again.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, assume T1 is not equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
Um, what can I do in that case?
Um, I can.
NOTE CONF
Well, first of all, I can bring the tea one
just on one side, the X1, so I can ride
NOTE CONF
t1 x1 equal to minus.
Sorry t2, x2 minus and so on.
NOTE CONF
T k x k um.
And then because t1 here is not equal to zero
NOTE CONF
I can divide three by it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So then x1 equals to minus t2 over t1 x2
minus and so on t k over t1 x k.
NOTE CONF
Uh those here again I just scale it.
And I've written x1 one of them as a linear
NOTE CONF
combination of the other.
So again um nice thing to play around.
NOTE CONF
But those two are equivalent.
And it means that the condition of having, say, none
NOTE CONF
of the vectors can be written as a linear combination
of the others.
NOTE CONF
I can write as this linear independence definition there.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Now that still looks strange.
I think if you first see it, because you're not
NOTE CONF
saying something is sort of saying it's a logical statement.
You know, if I've got this equation, then I can
NOTE CONF
deduce that or the scalars are zero.
So how do I work with that in practice?
NOTE CONF
So I have a couple of examples where I think
it's worthwhile that show us a bit where we're wanting
NOTE CONF
to go, but that just gives you a little bit
of an idea of how we play with that.
NOTE CONF
Um, so now that we know that what linear independence
is, um, is it possible to find three linear independent
NOTE CONF
vectors in R2?
Um, I'll just give you this again as a poll.
NOTE CONF
True or false?
Reset.
NOTE CONF
Reset does play, right?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, that should be live now.
Right.
NOTE CONF
10s.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Forwards.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, indeed.
Um, so it's probably quite difficult to sort of get
NOTE CONF
a, get a straight argument, but wanting to do is
to actually show you how to work with this concept.
NOTE CONF
So let's, let's just try to try to show that.
Uh, so what do we do.
NOTE CONF
Can we find three linearly independent vectors.
And I'll probably go back and uh, half that definition
NOTE CONF
of linear independence there.
Um, so what do we need to do?
NOTE CONF
We have assuming we do.
You know, let's, let's take three vectors, um, x x1,
NOTE CONF
x2, y1, y2 and z1 z2, um, and these are
all in R2.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
him and we now want to know are these linear,
NOTE CONF
independent or not?
So what we need to check is that we say
NOTE CONF
if we've got a linear combination of these that make
the zero vector, uh, what do we know about that?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So let's start that.
NOTE CONF
So we consider taking a linear combination of these.
So t um one times X1X2 plus t two times
NOTE CONF
Y1Y2 plus t three times z1 z2 um.
And this should be the zero vector.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So I can write this um sort of rewrite this
in various forms.
NOTE CONF
These are obviously sort of two equations.
Um, so I could write this as t1 x1 plus
NOTE CONF
t2 y1 plus t3 z1 equals to zero and the
same with the other component.
NOTE CONF
Y two plus T3Z2.
I have to be careful with the indices equal to
NOTE CONF
zero.
Now I'm interested in the values of TS, so I
NOTE CONF
can treat this as a system of linear equations thinking
the axes are numbers that I know.
NOTE CONF
I just want to know whether these numbers exist.
And the t three.
NOTE CONF
There are unknowns.
So I can write this a matrix form.
NOTE CONF
Um, I could write this as saying this is a
matrix.
NOTE CONF
My unknowns is t1, t2, t3.
And what I need to have here is x1, y1
NOTE CONF
z1 and x2 y2 z2 equal to zero.
And what I've interested in is is there a solution
NOTE CONF
to this here?
Um, such that all the teeth that not all the
NOTE CONF
teeth are equal to zero?
Now, obviously setting all the is equal to zero is
NOTE CONF
a solution.
But I'm interested in knowing.
NOTE CONF
Is there another one?
Now we have to go back and think right okay.
NOTE CONF
We've done linear systems of equations.
What do we know about them.
NOTE CONF
Um, and actually you can sort of think I can
go into row echelon form and uh, well it depends
NOTE CONF
a little bit on what these values are, but I
probably have to have one degree of freedom here.
NOTE CONF
Now, if you remember, um, I want to just do
it a little bit more, um, proper, um, because I'll
NOTE CONF
come back to that in a second.
So I remind you that we did indeed have this
NOTE CONF
theorem here, um, that says if I've got an M
times n matrix with rank R and consider the homogeneous
NOTE CONF
systems of equation, I've got a homogeneous system of equations.
Then it says the system has exactly n minus our
NOTE CONF
basic solutions.
So this is what we're getting.
NOTE CONF
If we have a degree of freedom um, and can
end in a and in a parameter.
NOTE CONF
So this is the number of basic solutions.
So what does this mean in our case here.
NOTE CONF
Um, when in our case what do we have.
N is the number of variables here.
NOTE CONF
Uh so we've got n equals to three.
Uh, the rank we don't really know because we don't
NOTE CONF
know what these X's are in general.
Uh, what we do know that at the maximum, there
NOTE CONF
can be one leading one, uh, in the row echelon
form and every row here.
NOTE CONF
So a number of rows is the maximum.
So the R has to be less than or equal
NOTE CONF
to two.
Um in other words n minus r has got to
NOTE CONF
be greater or equal to one.
So that means here we've got at least one basic
NOTE CONF
solution for the t's which isn't equal to zero.
So we've got a solution there.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Alternatively, I wonder because I come back to that I
NOTE CONF
wanted to use that theorem.
Um, but we do have did have another theorem that
NOTE CONF
simply says if a homogeneous system of equations has more
variables than equations, uh, that's what we have, then it
NOTE CONF
has a non-trivial solution.
So in other words, um, these uh, there is a
NOTE CONF
non-trivial solution.
And if we go back what this means, um, if
NOTE CONF
there wasn't one then the vectors would be linearly independent.
But we've just shown that whatever we're choosing here, that
NOTE CONF
is a non-trivial solution.
So these vectors cannot be linearly independent.
NOTE CONF
So it's not possible to find three linearly independent vectors.
Uh keep that in mind.
NOTE CONF
We'll come back to that.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Again uh, further sort of playing with with the um,
NOTE CONF
linearly independent.
Um, so suppose what?
NOTE CONF
We have three vectors in R3 that are actually linearly
independent, and we can stick them into a matrix half.
NOTE CONF
These are the column of the matrix.
Um, what does that mean for that matrix.
NOTE CONF
Um can we is there a relation to something like
the determinant, or do you think we can't really say
NOTE CONF
anything about that?
Um, again, I'll give you a pole to play with
NOTE CONF
that.
Reset display.
NOTE CONF
That's.
Right.
NOTE CONF
There's probably a little bit of a loaded question.
The question was just whether which way round is going
NOTE CONF
to go.
Um, yes, indeed.
NOTE CONF
Um, if the determinant is not equal to zero.
Um, These would be linearly independent.
NOTE CONF
And there's various ways to think about that.
For example, I think we've had sort of determinant as
NOTE CONF
the is the volume of the sort of shape spanned
by spanned in the sort of like the parallelepiped made
NOTE CONF
up of these vectors.
Um, so if there is a positive or there is
NOTE CONF
a volume which isn't equal to zero, these are sort
of in all different directions.
NOTE CONF
Um, if the the volume is zero, then there must
be more or less in the same plane, um, which
NOTE CONF
means that they are not linearly independent.
Um, but indeed, I sort of part of the purpose
NOTE CONF
of doing this is that I was going to show
you, um, how we deal with this linearly independence condition.
NOTE CONF
Um, so let's just do that again and, and see
what we have and why this, this is related to
NOTE CONF
the determinant.
Um, so assuming that we've got here u, V and
NOTE CONF
w um are vectors in R3 and the linearly independent.
Uh, so again we said that this means we've got
NOTE CONF
a system.
We have to look at whether we can find a
NOTE CONF
linear combination that makes the zero vector.
Um, so let's do that T one.
NOTE CONF
And I'm going to write this in components.
Yeah u1 u2 u3 um plus t2 uh v1 v2
NOTE CONF
and v3 uh plus t3 w1 w2 w3 uh equals
to the zero vector.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um and again this is a linear system of equations
NOTE CONF
here.
Um, and where the t1, t2 and T3 are my
NOTE CONF
variables.
So I can write this um, just in this form
NOTE CONF
a matrix um with components u1, u to u3.
V1 v2 v3.
NOTE CONF
W1 w2 w3.
Vector of unknowns t1 t2 t3 equals to zero.
NOTE CONF
You know what we're interested in?
To show that this is linear independent is that that
NOTE CONF
this has only the trivial solution.
Now that's what we call this when we're talking about
NOTE CONF
linear systems of equations.
If we can show that this necessarily means that the
NOTE CONF
vector t there has to be equal to zero.
Now this obviously, as I say is a linear systems
NOTE CONF
of equations.
So I can call this matrix A.
NOTE CONF
This here is my vector t and this here is
the zero vector um and uh again homogeneous systems of
NOTE CONF
equation.
A homogeneous system of equation has only the trivial solution.
NOTE CONF
If and we had quite a few conditions there.
One of them is that this is.
NOTE CONF
This is the case if A here is invertible.
Um, and that of course is the same as that
NOTE CONF
the determinant of A is not equal to zero.
So that's sort of showing a little bit I think
NOTE CONF
we've now taken things from various different parts of the
course how it all interlinked.
NOTE CONF
Um, actually checking the determinant is not not the worst
way as actually relatively good way to check whether three
NOTE CONF
vectors are linearly independent.
So it's not just a neat sort of some mathematical
NOTE CONF
curiosity, but it's actually relatively useful if you want to
show that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, now so that that sort of leads us now
NOTE CONF
to another inversion theorem we had that last time I
was here we had an inversion theorem.
NOTE CONF
Now we've got a few more conditions.
So we do have that um one and two here
NOTE CONF
I've basically just shown the matrix A is invertible or
the determinant is not equal to zero if the columns
NOTE CONF
of A are linearly independent.
Now we've got a few more things here on the
NOTE CONF
inversion theorem.
Something that might be surprising actually is the fourth one
NOTE CONF
there.
That the columns of A are linearly independent is equivalent
NOTE CONF
to that the rows of A are linearly independent.
And you might have thought that they're not necessarily related
NOTE CONF
to each other, but going through the determinant, the determinant
doesn't care whether it's the matrix or you take the
NOTE CONF
transpose of the matrix.
Um, so if the rows are independent, if the columns
NOTE CONF
are linearly independent, the same must be for the rows.
Um, so this is from Nicholson.
NOTE CONF
I should just say a couple of words.
There's the last statement there.
NOTE CONF
That says the rows of a span, the set of
all rows.
NOTE CONF
Now, this is a funny statement.
What do you mean by the set of all rows.
NOTE CONF
And I think it's related to just to give you
the context that I said, that if I talk about
NOTE CONF
vectors by default, I always mean column vectors.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So if I now take the span, the spanning set
of the rows of a, this would be sort of
NOTE CONF
a linear combination of the rows are still row vector.
So this is sort of a space of row vectors.
NOTE CONF
Of course to some extent this is equivalent to just
the normal R3.
NOTE CONF
It's sort of R3 turned on its head or sideways
or so.
NOTE CONF
And typically you wouldn't make the distinction.
Typically you would just say the the rows of a
NOTE CONF
also span R3.
But if you want it to be really particularly Nicholson
NOTE CONF
decided to do that.
In this case you'll have to talk about the space
NOTE CONF
or the set of all the rows, Right.
And then finally we've got this equivalence that we say
NOTE CONF
if the columns are of a or linearly independent, then
they span the space.
NOTE CONF
And now this looks a little bit strange not necessarily
related with each other.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to say a few words in that
direction here.
NOTE CONF
But actually the final proof of that that is true.
I'm going to give you in the reading quiz or
NOTE CONF
talk a little bit more about the reading quiz on
Monday.
NOTE CONF
Now.
Um, so but so this might be a bit bit.
NOTE CONF
So we said that linear independent and.
Right okay.
NOTE CONF
So um.
No, no I going ahead of myself.
NOTE CONF
Right.
I think where am I with time?
NOTE CONF
Um.
I might have some time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, I just so we said we wanted we
NOTE CONF
introduce linear independence to show whether a generating a spanning
set really doesn't have any redundant elements in that.
NOTE CONF
So have we.
Have we succeeded?
NOTE CONF
So let's assuming that we've got k vectors here which
are linearly independent.
NOTE CONF
We're going to look at the span of just the
first of them.
NOTE CONF
And then we look at the span of all of
them.
NOTE CONF
And then we look at the span of just k
minus one of them where we've taken one out.
NOTE CONF
Any one of them.
So what can we say.
NOTE CONF
Um, are these indeed are these the same sets.
Um, it's one of them.
NOTE CONF
Is a subset of the others the proper subset of
the others?
NOTE CONF
So again, I'd like you to have a quick, quick
think about that.
NOTE CONF
All.
Right, a couple more seconds.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So again, um, probably slightly loaded question.
NOTE CONF
Um, but indeed, um, if we have that situation, we
can now say if they're linearly independent.
NOTE CONF
Um, they said the span said y must be properly
bigger than X.
NOTE CONF
Um, so if I say properly bigger, um, that means
I must be able to there must be at least
NOTE CONF
one vector in Y there that isn't an X.
Uh, which one is that?
NOTE CONF
What can you give me one.
X k.
NOTE CONF
So x k cannot be in x because if x
k were in x, then I would have been a
NOTE CONF
linear combination of the others and there wouldn't have been
linear independent.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So uh, linear independence is, is a condition that says
in our spanning set we don't have any redundant vectors.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So linearly independent spanning set does not contain superfluous vectors.
NOTE CONF
And because there is such a nice property, we're going
to give it a name to that.
NOTE CONF
So a linearly independent spanning set is what we call
a basis.
NOTE CONF
Well, so a subspace or a set of vectors is
a basis.
NOTE CONF
If a the set of vectors is linearly dependent and
b it spans the subspace okay.
NOTE CONF
And now we started with the whole thing of saying
that this sort of thinking about the sort of the
NOTE CONF
spanning set as a generating set was quite unsatisfactory, because
we don't know what these elements are.
NOTE CONF
There might not have the same number of elements, stuff
like that.
NOTE CONF
So now we've got basis here, we've got linear independence,
this world.
NOTE CONF
Does this help us?
Um, so do we.
NOTE CONF
Do we know now anything more?
Can we fix something?
NOTE CONF
Uh, so assuming that we've got a subspace there, we've
got two different bases for the subspace.
NOTE CONF
What's their relation?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Do they have the same basis?
Do you have elements in common?
NOTE CONF
Uh, can we say that every element of one base
is a linear combination of the others?
NOTE CONF
Do they have the same size?
That was something that really bugged us about the sort
NOTE CONF
of just general generating sets in general spanning sets.
Do they have at least the same size, or do
NOTE CONF
we not get any of these here?
Um, again, um, I just like you to think about
NOTE CONF
that for a second.
A minute indeed.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Once I can set this up.
NOTE CONF
I've choices that time.
Um, no multiple answers.
NOTE CONF
Display.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It should be life.
Oh, there you are.
NOTE CONF
Allowed.
You should be allowed.
NOTE CONF
Multiple answers.
Sorry if I've set it up incorrectly.
NOTE CONF
There are multiple correct answers.
Um, but we'll just see what happens.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So not entirely clear here, but there's a sort of
NOTE CONF
three.
And four is where most people put their money.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
I just want to convince you quickly that one and
NOTE CONF
two isn't correct.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Once I've got this right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I could have.
I could have listed here one zero and zero one
NOTE CONF
and assume you believe me that that is a basis
of R2 linear, independent, and it spans.
NOTE CONF
But on the other hand, I also have one one
and one minus one.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we seen yesterday that this spans R2.
Um, and those two vectors are linearly dependent.
NOTE CONF
So you've got two different bases for our.
True.
NOTE CONF
They don't have any elements in common.
Um, so one A and B, their answers are out.
NOTE CONF
Um, every element is a linear combination of the other.
And indeed that is general.
NOTE CONF
But I also have that B1 and B2 are the
same size.
NOTE CONF
And this might be a little bit not entirely obvious
that that should be the case.
NOTE CONF
And, um, so I just want to spend a little
bit of an argument of why this whole.
NOTE CONF
So we had this thing, can we find three linearly
independent vectors in R2.
NOTE CONF
And we said, no, we can't.
And indeed you can generalise this by saying, assuming I've
NOTE CONF
got any subspace and the subspace can be spent by
m vectors.
NOTE CONF
So like R2 can be spent by two vectors, I
know that, um, and on the other hand I know
NOTE CONF
that I've got k linearly independent vectors in there.
Um, so I was wondering whether I can find three,
NOTE CONF
but this says then generally the number of linearly independent
vectors has to be less than or equal to the
NOTE CONF
number of spanning vectors.
So this is pretty much the generalisation of what I
NOTE CONF
had up here.
Um, so if you do believe me that if you
NOTE CONF
do believe that and I say, let I have a
subspace here and I've got two bases.
NOTE CONF
Different number of elements.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Now I can say that you here my subspace is
spanned by these first vectors here.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Because the base is spans.
NOTE CONF
On the other hand the bases must be linearly independent.
So the second basis here those vectors must be linearly
NOTE CONF
independent.
So in other words k here the number of elements
NOTE CONF
here has to be less than or equal to m.
But I could have done the whole thing the other
NOTE CONF
way around.
Yeah I could have said, uh, the second set of
NOTE CONF
vectors here is a spans the set.
And this set here.
NOTE CONF
No sorry.
The second set, this here spans the set.
NOTE CONF
And that set is linearly independent.
So also must have m less than or equal to
NOTE CONF
k.
So in other words all bases that I might have
NOTE CONF
if I've got two different bases for subspace.
They must have the same number of elements.
NOTE CONF
So that might be a little bit surprising, because it
says that we say that the number of elements of
NOTE CONF
a basis is an invariant of the subspace.
So it might be a funny name, but it means
NOTE CONF
that actually the number of elements of a basis is
the property of the subspace.
NOTE CONF
It's not actually property of the basis itself.
Whatever you're choosing, you're always going to get the same
NOTE CONF
number of elements in a particular subspace.
And because this is invariant, it doesn't matter how we
NOTE CONF
choose the basis.
We give this a name.
NOTE CONF
And that indeed is what is called the dimension of
a subspace.
NOTE CONF
So it's the number of elements in each basis, or
the maximum number of linearly independent vectors you can find
NOTE CONF
in that space.
So dimension is one of these words that I think
NOTE CONF
you've used a lot.
And you sort of think what it means.
NOTE CONF
This here is what it means.
um.
NOTE CONF
Mathematically.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So before I stop, I just want to have two
more remarks on this one.
NOTE CONF
It means that we now have a classification of all
the subspaces of R3.
NOTE CONF
Um, namely, we know that R3 has got has got
three dimensions.
NOTE CONF
A basis has got three elements.
So all the subspaces must have dimension two, 1 or
NOTE CONF
0, or a subspace of.
Mentioned two is any plane through the origin of dimension
NOTE CONF
one is any line through the origin, and then dimension
zero would just be the zero vector, nothing else.
NOTE CONF
So fundamentally those are the only subspaces of R2.
Now the other thing I just want to point out
NOTE CONF
is I'm going to go right back to the slide
that I heart at the beginning or in the middle,
NOTE CONF
that I thought there was a reason why I have
this.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so this one here.
Um, solution space of a homogeneous system of equations.
NOTE CONF
We have seen yesterday that the solution space of this
is a subspace.
NOTE CONF
And the we say that there are for this there
n minus r basic solutions.
NOTE CONF
And we now know why we call this basic solutions.
Because these solutions are indeed a basis for the subspace
NOTE CONF
that is the solution set here.
So just to say that this is the reason why
NOTE CONF
this is called these are called basic solutions.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Right okay I think that is it for today.
And it will be it for me next week is
NOTE CONF
Eric I believe.
And you will see me back again here in week
NOTE CONF
11 for a revision clause.
Yeah, right.
NOTE CONF
See you then.